A day after former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh termed the demonetisation move as “monumental management failure”, BJP president Amit Shah hit back with a jibe saying people sitting on huge blackmoney only feel the pain of it.

“Manmohanji was making a statement in Rajya Sabha. He felt a lot of pain because of demonetisation decision. Nobody keeps cash of Rs. 10 crore or Rs. 20 crore in house. So a common man will not lose anything due to demonetisation. But people, who stand to lose huge blackmoney, can feel the pain,” Mr. Shah said addressing a party rally here on Friday.

“Till November 7, whole opposition was asking Modiji that what steps you took to tackle blackmoney. Since evening of November 8, they were asking why you took this step. I want to ask them what you have lost,” he said. “The glow on face of opposition parties has faded,” mocked Mr. Shah.

“The situation is like a high flood in River Mahanadi. There is water everywhere. And one old tree is still not uprooted. To take shelter, a cat, mouse, snake and common mongoose climb on the tree. But, the mouse is not afraid of the cat and common mongooses does not attack snake. Everybody is waiting for the flood water to recede for climbing down the tree,” the BJP president pointed out.

Following the demonetisation flood, Congress, TMC, Samajwadi Party, AAP and Mayawati have gathered in one platform. They are waiting for the overwhelming support for demonetisation move to diminish,” he said.

“In one strike, Modiji has taken steps to eliminate blackmoney for welfare of the poor. The people are with the Prime Minister,” the BJP president said.

“Prime Minister Modi has been working for development of the country. When Modiji came to power in 2014, the country was stuck in recession and whole world believed that India’s growth story had ended. Now, the world reckons that the 21st century belongs to India. Under the stewardship of Mr. Modi, our country has become the fastest growing economy in the world,” he said.

Taking a potshot at Congress vice president Rahul Gandhi, Mr. Shah said, “He was questioning steps being taken to defend country’s boundary. When UPA was ruling under leadership of Manmohan Singh and Sonia Gandhi, regular attacks were taking place along the border, but enemies were not getting retaliation. After Modi government came to power, if bullets were fired from Pakistan’s soil, the same was being responded with mortar. For this, soldiers need not require permission every time they want to strike back.”
